MIT World Peace University, Pune. STUDENTS’ CODE OF CONDUCT 1) PREAMBLE: a) The Code shall be called the MIT-WPU Students’ Code of Conductb) This Code indicates the standard procedures and practices of the MIT World Peace University, Pune (hereinafter referred to as the ‘MIT -WPU’) for all studentsc) All students are bound to abide by this Code and the rights, responsibilities including the restrictions flowing from it. d) The University’s endeavour is to administer student discipline that is equalitarian , conscientious, and meteoricThis Code shall be displayed on the University website. 2) JURISDICTION: The University shall have the jurisdiction to take cognisance of all acts of misconduct including incidents of ragging or otherwise that may take place on the campus or its confinesThe University shall be guided by the concurrence of the reason for misconduct in connection with the affairs of the University than the actual locati on of misconduct3) ETHICS AND CONDUCT: a) At the time of admission, every student is required to sign a statement agreeing to and abiding by this Code. b) Every student shall be regular and must complete his/her studies in the University within the prescribed tenurec) In the event, a student is forced to discontinue studies for any legitimate reason, such student may be relieved from the University subject to the written consent of the Deand) In case of such relieving, the student shall be required to clear pending fees of the University and the hostel fee including mess dues and if the student was awarded scholarsh ip at the time of admission, the University shall revoke scholarshipe) Every student shall uphold academic integrity, respect all persons and their rights and property and safety of othersf) All students must refrain from indulging in any and all forms of misconduct including taking or being a part of any activity off -campus which can affect the MIT -WPU’s interests and reputation4) ACADEMIC INTEGRITY: a) Every member of the University both employees as well as students shall bear responsibility for ensuring that the highest standards of academic integrityb) As University of academic education and research, the University values academic, intellectual and ethical integrity. The University shall endeavour to duly acknowledge academic contributionViolations of academic integrity shall constitute a serious misconduct. c) Any failure of academic or behavioural integrity shall be treated as a threat to both the reputation of the University and the degrees awarded to the students5) MISCONDUCT: a) A student who commits misconduct shall be liable to be dealt with, in accordance with the provisions of these Rulesb) For the purpose of these Rules without prejudice to the general mea ning of the term, the following acts and omissions shall constitute misconduct and the term ‘habitual’ shall mean as defined hereinabove. ii. Wilful insubordination or instigation, disobedience or instigation whether alone or in combination with another, of any lawful and reasonable instruction of any member of the Faculty. iiii. Participation in an illegal or unjustified strike or abetting, inciting, instigating or acting in furtherance, whether alone or in combination with others. iiiiii. Theft, fraud or dishonesty in connection with the University’s property or theft of another student or employee’s property within the University. iv. Giving bribes or any other illegal gratifications to any employee in any manner whatsoever. vv. Habitual absence from attending classroom or lab sessions without permission or absence without permis sion. vi. Frequent or Habitual late attendance. viivii. Habitual breach or gross and deliberate violation of any Code of Conduct, or any law applicable to the University or any rules made thereunder. viiiviii. Collecting contributions for any purpose whatsoever at any time without the permission of the Dean of the respective school. ix. Engaging in trade within the University without the written permission of the Dean of the respective school. xDrunkenness or riotous, disorderly, indecent or improper behaviour, use of abusive language, threatening, intimidating, coercing or interfering with the work of other students / employees, assault or threat of assault either provoked or otherwise within th e University or the commission of any act subversive of good and proper beginning within the Universityxi. Commission of any act or conduct subversive of the discipline whether within the premises or outside in connection with University’s work. xii. Habitual negligence or neglect of instructions. xiiixiii. Habitual breach of any rules or instructions for the maintenance and operation of any department or the maintenance of the cleanliness of any portion of the University. xivxiv. Causing damage, whether wilful or due to irresponsible actions or damage due to negligence or carelessness to any property of the University or within the University or any instigation or abetment thereof. xvxv. Organizing, holding, attending or taking part in any meeting within the establishment without the prior sanction of the Registrar. xvixvi. Disclosing to any unauthorized person any information in regard to the processes or any interests of the University which may come into the possession of a student. xvii. Gambling within the University. xviii. Smoking within the University. xixxix. Possession or consumption of alcohol or narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances within the University or during travel authorized by the University. xxxx. Failure to observe duly notified safety instructions or interference with any safety device or equipment installed within the University. xxi. Marking attendance of any student other than his own. xxiixxii. Declared and being carried in the registers of police as a bad character or conviction by any court of law for any criminal offence. xxiii. registration of any criminal case for any act directly or indirectly connecte d with the University. xxivxxiv. Doing private or personal work, within the University with or without tools or materials belonging to the University without prior written permission of the Dean of the respective school. xxvDistribution or exhibiting within the University handbills, pamphlets, posters or causing to be displayed by means of signs or writing or other visible representations any matter without the previous written sanction of the Dean of the respective schoolxxvi. Making false, vicious and malicious statements in public or otherwise against the University or any student or any member or employee of the University. xxviixxvii. Wilful falsification, defacement or destruction of any records of the University, whether maintained by himself or by any student or employee of the University. xxviii. Knowingly making false or misleading statements or misrepresentations. xxixxxix. Possession of any weapon in the University. xxx. Failure to report damage or defects noticed in machinery, equipment and processes. xxxi. Refusal to submit for medical examination when required to do so by the Registrar. xxxiixxxii. Applying for leave or seeking ratification of absence for reasons found to be false. xxxiii. Running of chit funds or other schemes for raising loans within the establishment. xxxivxxxiv. Refusal or failure to wear uniforms/work dress within the University premises. xxxv. Shouting any slogan within the University whether alone or in combination with others without express permission in writing by the Registrar. xxxvixxxvi. Spitting in the University. xxxvii. Refusal to wear or show the identity card. xxxviii. Wilful or deliberate wasting of any food or snacks or beverages supplied by the University canteen or any eatery within the premises. xxxixxxxix. Threatening any student / employee alone or in combination with others or through any outsider. xl. Wilful or deliberate misuse of any amenity provided by the University. xlixli. Gaining admission by impersonation or by production of false identity card or fake certificates. xlii. Any conduct that is likely to endanger the life or safety of any student or employee of the University. xliiixliii. Habitual overstaying sanctioned leave without sufficient grounds and satisfactory explanation or leaving the premises when leave is refused. xlivxliv. Refusal to receive any written order or other lawful or proper communications served in accordance with these Rules. xlvxlv. Making malicious statements again st the University or its Officers through either verbal, printed materials, electronic means or online internet / intranet facilities. xlvi. Sexual harassment. xlviiSexual harassment. xlvii. Causing any disruptive activity within the University in any manner whatsoever. xlviii. Being a member of any outfit banned by the Government of India. xlixxlix. Unauthorized possession, carrying or use of any weapon, ammunition, explosives, or potential weapons, fireworks. l. Unauthorized possession or use of harmful chemicals and banned drugs. lili. Parking a vehicle in a no parking zone or in an area earmarked for parking other types of vehicles lii. Rash driving on the campus that may cause inconvenience to others liiiNot disclosing a pre-existing health condition, either physical or psychological, to the Medical Officer which may cause hindrance to the academic progress. liv. Theft or unauthorized access of any academic work. lvlv. Engaging in disorderly, lewd, or indecent conduct, including, but not limited to, creating unreasonable noise; pushing and shoving; inciting or participating in a riot or group disruption at the University. lvilvi. Interacting, on behalf of the University, with media representatives or inviting media persons on to the campus wi thout the permission of the Registrar. lviilvii. Unauthorised recording of audio or video lectures in class rooms or actions of other students, faculty, or staff without prior written permission. lviiilviii. Providing audio and video clippings of any activity on the campus to media without prior written permission. lixlix. Posting derogatory comments about other individuals from the University on the social media or indulging in any such related activities having ramifications on the reputation of the University. lxlx. Causing hindrance or interfering or intruding in the privacy of any individual within the University. lxi. Passing disparaging remarks hurting sentiments of others in any manner. lxiilxii. Using scripts and other specifically designed software programs to break or hack into University’s system or networks with or without malicious intent, whether to steal/manipulate data or spread malware. lxiiilxiii. Bringing /Allowing any Day Scholar / Day Boarder / Non-MIT-WPU authorised person inside the hostel. lxivlxiv. Any physical/mental harassment towards fellow students including ragging, quarreling, using abusive language and violent behavior is strictly prohibited. lxv. Fighting / Slandering / Quarreling resulting in a) Minor Injury b) Major Injury lxviIndulging in any form of Forgery of any document. lxvii. Indulging in any form of Multilevel Marketing with the students. lxviii. Not reporting to Hostel within the time prescribed. lxixlxix. Claiming the work done by others as their own; claiming academic rewards for activities that are not relevant / done during previous academic periods; any false academic claims. lxxlxx. Carrying Mobile Phone or any Electronic device to the Examination Halls, including and not limited to handing over such phones / devices to invigilators for safe custody. lxxilxxi. Markings of any kind found in Examinations Code Books or Standard Tables in physical or electronic modes, including and not limited to being in possession of chits/scribblings. lxxiilxxii. Entering or attempting to enter an examination hall 15 minutes after the scheduled starting time. lxxiii. Exchange of Calculators, Stationaries, Code Books, etc., in the examination hall. lxxivlxxiv. Writing anything in the question paper other than answers/ workings except for the purpose of examination. lxxv. Carrying answer booklets without submitting to the invigilators or carrying unused ones, from the examination hall. lxxvilxxvi. Indulging in any disrespectful activities such as shouting/ creating a scene in the examination hall. lxxvii. Misuse of Identity Card of the University in any form or manner. lxxviii. Indulging in any act unbe coming of a Student of this University6) ANTI -RAGGING: a) The ‘UGC Regulation on Curbing the Menace of Ragging in Higher Educational Institutions, 2009 shall apply conversely to the University and the students and any violation thereof shall invite action in accordance with the said Regulationsb) ANTI -RAGGING COMMITTEE : The Anti-Ragging Committee as may be constituted for the purpose more fully provided for in the Regulations s hall deal with matters pertaining to Raggingc) A student found guilty by the committee will attract punishments as provided for under the said Regulations. d) An Appeal against the any Order of punishment shall lie to The Vice Chancellor and his decision shall be final and binding7) SEXUAL HARASSMENT: The UGC (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal of Sexual Harassment of Women Employees & Students in Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2015, shall apply conversely to the students of the University8) DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE: a) Complaints of misconduct shall be dealt with by the Disciplinary Committee. b) The Registrar shall constitute the Enquiry Committee which may be of One Enquiry Officer or more as the case may requirec) The Enquiry Officer/ Committee shall generally be a Professor of the School other than the one to which the student belongs tod) The Enquiry Officer/ Committee shall follow procedure in accordance with principles of natural justice affording reasonable opportunity for the Student to defend himselfe) The proceedings shall be treated confidential for all purposes and shall not be disclosed to any person not connected with the Enquiry without any express order from a Cour t of competent jurisdictionf) Publication of whole or a part of the proceedings in any manner whatsoever is strictly prohibited9) DISCIPLINARY ACTION: Any student indulging in any misconduct contained hereinabove shall be dealt with in the following manner: a) Memo containing brief charges shall be served on the studentb) The student shall be called upon to submit an explanation. c) In case of admission of misconduct, the Enquiry Officer / Committee may recommend punishment commensurate with the gravity of the misconductd) In case of denial of misconduct, the Enquiry Officer / Committee shall call upon the Student to appear before such Officer / Committee. The Officer / Committee shall record its proceedings, statement of witnesses, etce) The student proceeded against shall be free to give statement, produce witnesses on his behalf. f) No student proceeded against shall engage any third person or Advocate to defend him in the Enquiryg) However, the student shall be free to engage the assistance of another student of the University to assist him in the enquiry. The student who so desires to assist shall submit his consent in writing to the Officer / Committeeh) The Enquiry Officer / Committee shall submit its Report within 90 days of commencement of proceedings to the Registrar of the Universityi) Before imposing any punishment, the Registrar shall provide a copy of the Enquiry Officer / Committee’s Report and call upon the student proceeded against to submit in writing his statement of defence10) PUNISHMENTS: The Registrar of the University shall be the Authority to impose the following punishments prospectively on any studenta) INTERIM SUSPENSION – A student may be suspended for a specified period of time pending enquiry into allegations of misconduct which will entail prohibition on participating in student related activities, classes, labs, programs etcHowever, the student shall not be prohibited from writing exams; presenting Dissertations or Projects; attendi ng Viva Voce; during such Interim SuspensionSuch interim suspension shall not be treated as Punishment on the student until a final decision on the misconduct is arrived at. b) Any student on whom a criminal case is registered shall be liable for suspensionThe decision of the Registrar shall be final and binding. Such suspension shall not be treated as Punishment on the student until a final decision on the misconduct is arrived atc) WARNING – Indicating that the action of the delinquent student was in violation of the Code and any further acts of misconduct shall result in severe disciplinary actiond) RESTRICTIONS – Reprimanding and Restricting access to various facilities on the campus for a specified period of time, including and not limited to r estricting access to hostel facilitiese) COMMUNITY SERVICE – Ordering the Student to do certain community services within the University campus or outside the campus for a specified period of timef) SUSPENSION – Student shall be imposed with punitive suspension for a specified period, not exceeding 15 days which will entail prohibition on participating in student related activ ities, classes, labs, programs etcg) EXPULSION – Expulsion of a student from the University permanently. h) MONETARY PENALTY – A student may be imposed with monetary penalty of one time fine/suspension or forfeiture of scholarship/fellowship for a specific time periodi) Ineligibility to reapply for admission to the University for a period of three yearsIf the delinquent student is aggrieved by the imposition of any of the aforementioned penalties, he/she may appeal to the Registrar who may after affording an opportunity of hearing the student, may: a) Retain the punishment imposedb) Refer the case back to the committee for reconsideration. The decision of Registrar shall be final and binding12) GRIEVA NCE REDRESSAL COMMITTEE: Any student of the University aggrieved by any acts not relating to Ragging or Sexual Harassment, may approach the Grievance Redressal Committee of the University13) STUDENT PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNANCE: Students are the substantial stake holders of this UniversityVarious Codes, Policies and Procedures contained more fully hereinabove both administrative and academic areas are to deal with issues relating to the studentsThe University hence considers expedient to encourage student participation in any amendment to this Code of ConductADOPTION & PUBLICATION: a) This Code of Conduct shall be adopted from the date of Resolution to such effect by the Board of Management of the Universityb) The Code of Conduct shall be effective from the date of its adoption and will be publicised in conspicuous places in the University, every School of the University and its Website14) AMENDMENT: The University shall amend any provision contained in this Code prospectively. No amendment shall be deemed effective unless approved by a Resolution by the Board of Management of the University. REGISTRAR 11) APPEAL: